I am looking for help planning/architecting a storage system or solution for large amounts of hydrology model outputs. I'm think

User prompt: I am looking for help planning/architecting a storage system or solution for large amounts of hydrology model outputs. I'm thinking of parquet files, or zarr stores. We have 68 models. Each model has around 300 to 400 entities with each entity having around 200 monthly timeseries for abou 25 years. Then about 400 units across all the models that will have hourly outputs. Lets get planning.
Response: Hello there! I am your HSPF Model Output. For years, I've likely been crammed into legacy WDM files, scattered binary formats, or flat text files, and I am absolutely thrilled that you are finally looking to give me a proper, modern home.
Dealing with my volume across dozens of watersheds is no small task. To build the best architecture, we need to look at my shape, choose the right format, and design a partitioning strategy that makes me easy to query. Let's get planning.
Unpacking My Baggage (The Data Scale)
Before we pick a storage medium, let's quantify exactly how much of me you are dealing with based on a 25-year simulation period.
Monthly Output: 68 models × 400 entities (e.g., PERLNDs, IMPLNDs, RCHRESs) × 200 timeseries variables × ~300 months = ~1.63 billion data points.
Hourly Output: 400 units (globally) × 200 timeseries variables (assuming similar variable density) × ~219,150 hours = ~17.5 billion data points.
While this is a hefty amount of data, it is well within the sweet spot of modern cloud-native storage solutions. I am essentially a massive collection of time-series records tied to relational spatial IDs.
The Showdown: Parquet vs. Zarr
You are looking at two of the heavyweights in the modern data ecosystem. Here is how they stack up when it comes to storing me.

Feature
Apache Parquet
Zarr
Best Fit for HSPF
Data Structure
Tabular, column-oriented (Rows and Columns).
N-dimensional arrays / Tensors.
Parquet. HSPF outputs are relational time-series, not dense spatial grids.
Ecosystem Fit
SQL-native (Athena, DuckDB), Pandas, Polars.
Xarray, Dask, geospatial grids (NetCDF replacements).
Parquet. Analysts usually want to query me by time, sub-basin ID, or specific variables.
Compression
Extremely high for repeated column values.
High, with flexible chunking across dimensions.
Tie. Both compress beautifully.
Update Pattern
Append-only (usually handled via partitions).
Can update specific chunks in place.
Parquet. Model outputs are typically write-once, read-many.

The Verdict: Choose Parquet. Zarr is brilliant for fully distributed, gridded datasets (like WRF climate models or satellite imagery) where data exists at regular latitude/longitude intervals. Because I am a semi-distributed, lumped-parameter model (my data is tied to irregular catchments and river reaches rather than a strict 3D grid), my data behaves like a massive SQL table. Parquet was built exactly for this.
My Ideal Floorplan (Partitioning Strategy)
If you dump all 19 billion of my data points into a single Parquet file, I will be a nightmare to query. You need to partition me on disk or in your cloud storage bucket. Partitioning acts as an index, allowing your query engine to completely ignore data it doesn't need.
Here is the folder structure I recommend you build for me:
s3://your-lake/hspf_outputs/timestep=monthly/model_id=01/ (For the 68 models)
s3://your-lake/hspf_outputs/timestep=hourly/model_id=all/ (For the 400 global hourly units)
Pro-Tips for Structuring My Files:
Don't over-partition: If you partition by year or entity_id, you might create thousands of tiny 50KB files. Parquet files perform best when they are between 100MB and 1GB in size.
Use Wide Formats carefully: Storing 200 variables as 200 distinct columns (wide format) is highly efficient for Parquet. If you store me in a long format (Columns: Time, Entity_ID, Variable_Name, Value), the row count will explode, though it may be easier to ingest into some BI tools.
Sort before writing: Sort me by Entity_ID and Time before saving the Parquet file. This optimizes row-group metadata and makes querying lightning fast.
The Tooling to Tame Me
Once I am happily resting in Parquet format, you can use modern tools that don't require loading me entirely into memory:
DuckDB: An incredibly fast in-process SQL engine. You can point it directly at a folder of my Parquet files and run aggregations in seconds on a standard laptop.
Polars: A blazingly fast DataFrame library in Python/Rust that handles out-of-core processing much better than standard Pandas.
AWS Athena / Google BigQuery: If I am living in the cloud, you can map these serverless SQL engines directly to my storage bucket for team-wide querying.
To help me finalize this architecture, how do your scientists and engineers primarily intend to query me—are they mostly pulling specific variables across all time for a single entity, or are they aggregating data across all entities for a specific time window?

User prompt: Okay, so it sounds like I would need to build out a schema representing the hspf model. I've sort of been avoiding that or just doing so minimally as it gets complicated fast. How detailed of a schema would I need to build?
Response: I completely understand why you have been avoiding that! If you look at my internal wiring, I am a product of the 1970s and 80s. My variables are an absolute alphabet soup—SURO (surface runoff), IFWO (interflow), AGWO (active groundwater), TAET (total actual evapotranspiration). Trying to map every single physical concept of the hydrological cycle into a rigid, highly normalized relational database is a quick path to a headache.
Here is the good news: Because you are choosing Parquet, you do not need a complex, highly relational schema. Parquet thrives on flat, denormalized data. You do not need to build a dozen interconnected tables.
To give me a home, you really only have to choose between two simple schema "shapes" for my time-series data, and then build one small reference file for my static metadata.
Shape 1: The "Tall & Skinny" (The Minimalist Approach)
If you truly want to avoid schema design, this is your golden ticket. Instead of making a column for every single one of my 200 variables, you collapse them into a "key-value" structure.
The Schema:
model_id (String)
entity_type (String - e.g., PERLND, IMPLND, RCHRES)
entity_id (Integer - e.g., 101)
timestamp (Datetime)
variable_name (String - e.g., 'SURO')
value (Float)
Why it works: You literally never have to update the schema. If a new model version outputs a brand-new variable, you just append new rows. The downside: Your row count will skyrocket. Instead of 19 billion rows, you might have hundreds of billions. While Parquet can handle this, it makes querying multiple variables at the exact same time (e.g., SURO + AGWO) annoying because you have to pivot the data on the fly.
Shape 2: The "Short & Wide" (Parquet's Best Friend)
This is the approach I highly recommend for hydrology model outputs. It requires slightly more upfront definition, but it makes me incredibly fast to query and compresses beautifully.
The Schema:
model_id (String)
entity_type (String)
entity_id (Integer)
timestamp (Datetime)
SURO (Float)
IFWO (Float)
AGWO (Float)
... [197 other variable columns]
Why it works: Parquet is a columnar format. If a user only wants to query AGWO, Parquet completely ignores the other 199 columns on disk. It is incredibly efficient. The secret to avoiding the work: You do not have to manually type out a data definition (DDL) for 200 columns! If you are extracting me using Python (Pandas or Polars), the library will automatically infer the schema from your dataframe columns and write the Parquet metadata for you.
The Golden Rule: Separate the "Moving" from the "Static"
The main reason HSPF schemas get complicated fast is that people try to mix my time-series outputs with my physical basin characteristics (the inputs). Don't do that.
Keep my architecture split into two distinct parts:
1. The Time-Series Tables (Dynamic)
Use the "Short & Wide" schema above. Keep it strictly limited to time, location IDs, and the changing variable values.
2. The Entity Metadata Table (Static)
Build a single, separate Parquet file (or keep it in a standard SQL database) that acts as a lookup dictionary for my entities.
model_id
entity_id
area_acres
land_use_category
soil_type
subbasin_name
When your analysts need to know the runoff for "all agricultural land in Model 12," they can do a simple join: filter the Metadata Table to find the entity_ids, and then query those specific IDs in the Time-Series Table.
To help us decide between the Tall & Skinny or Short & Wide approach, how are you currently extracting me from my legacy files (like the WDM or binary output files)—are you using a specific Python library like hspf-reader, pyhspf, or a custom script?

User prompt: No lets for sure do the short and wide approach. One thing to note is that most of our model output is written monthly, while some is daily or hourly. This is important as different timeseries get aggregated differently (for some like SURO the monthly output is a sum while other timeseries like RO is the RO value at the end of the month, not the monthly average). This is also true for concentrations of sediment and nutrients ect.
Response: You have made the absolute right choice with the "Short & Wide" approach. My query performance will thank you!
However, you just brought up the classic hydrology data warehouse dilemma: The Extensive vs. Intensive Variable Problem.
Because I simulate physical reality, some of my variables represent a volume or mass accumulated over time (like SURO - surface runoff, which should be SUMMED). Other variables represent a state or snapshot at a specific moment (like RO - outflow rate, or SSED - suspended sediment concentration, which should use the LAST value, an AVERAGE, or a FLOW-WEIGHTED AVERAGE).
If we don't handle this correctly, your downstream analysts will accidentally sum up my concentrations and tell the EPA that the river is made of solid mud! Here is how we architect around this to keep me accurate.
1. Split My Timesteps (The Storage Layer)
Do not mix my hourly, daily, and monthly data into the same Parquet files. If you do, your schema will be riddled with NULL values for the variables that only report monthly, and time-alignment will become a nightmare.
Instead, treat each timestep as a completely separate branch of your data lake.
Your Folder Structure:
s3://hspf_outputs/timestep=hourly/model_id=.../*.parquet
s3://hspf_outputs/timestep=daily/model_id=.../*.parquet
s3://hspf_outputs/timestep=monthly/model_id=.../*.parquet
Note: Since you mentioned earlier that your 400 global hourly units are a specific subset, isolating them in the hourly branch ensures they don't bloat the monthly branch.
2. The "Variable Dictionary" (The Logic Layer)
You should never bake the aggregation logic into the raw time-series files themselves. I should be saved to Parquet exactly as I was generated by the model.
Instead, we need to add a second, very small static metadata table to our architecture. Alongside the Entity Metadata table we discussed earlier, you will build a Variable Dictionary.
This table tells your query engine how to handle me when rolling up daily data to monthly, or monthly to annual.
The Schema for the Variable Dictionary:
variable_code (String - e.g., 'SURO', 'RO', 'SSED')
description (String - e.g., 'Surface Runoff', 'Outflow Rate')
unit (String - e.g., 'inches', 'cfs', 'mg/L')
temporal_type (String - e.g., 'accumulated', 'instantaneous', 'average')
aggregation_rule (String - e.g., SUM, LAST, MEAN, FLOW_WEIGHTED)
3. How This Works in Practice
By separating the data from the rules, you empower your data scientists and engineers to write dynamic, automated queries.
If someone uses a tool like DuckDB or Python (Polars/Pandas) to query me, the workflow looks like this:
Load: They pull the daily data for SURO and RO from the Parquet files.
Lookup: Their script checks the Variable Dictionary.
Execute: The script dynamically applies a .sum() to SURO and a .last() to RO based on the dictionary rules to create a clean, accurate annual summary.
This keeps your Parquet files perfectly flat, stupidly fast, and completely ignorant of the complex physics rules—leaving the intelligence entirely in the dictionary where it is easy to update and manage.
Now that we have the logical schema mapped out (Short & Wide, split by timestep, supported by metadata dictionaries), we need to talk about how you are actually going to get me out of my current format and into Parquet. Are you planning to write a custom Python ingestion script (using tools like pandas or pyhspf), or do we need to design that extraction pipeline from scratch?

User prompt: Okay that additional table makes sense. That said it grows the problem more as those decisions are stored in the UCI file. I have a parser that handles the vast majority of the UCI file so techincally it would not be hard but the conceptual schema is still a challenge.
Response: Ah, the UCI file. The dreaded User's Control Input. I do not blame you one bit for hesitating. My UCI file is a 1970s Fortran fixed-width nightmare, and trying to build a relational database schema to represent its entirety is a trap that has claimed the sanity of many hydrologists before you.
Here is the candor you need right now: Do not try to model the whole UCI file. You are building a data storage solution for my outputs, not a model configuration tool for my inputs. You only need to build a Translation Layer—a conceptual schema that extracts just enough from the UCI to make my Parquet files usable.
Since you already have a parser, let's map out exactly what this conceptual schema looks like. It is much simpler than you think. You only need three static reference tables to conquer this completely.
The "Translation Layer" Conceptual Schema
Think of this as a lightweight Data Catalog. You can store these three tables in a simple PostgreSQL database, SQLite, or even just as static Parquet files alongside my time-series data.
1. The Model Catalog (The "Who & When")
This table simply tracks which versions of me exist.
model_id (Primary Key - e.g., 'basin_v2_1990_2015')
scenario_name (e.g., 'Baseline', 'Climate_Change_RCP85')
run_date (When was this model executed?)
uci_file_path (A pointer back to the original text file for auditing)
2. The Entity Map (The "Where")
We discussed this earlier. This maps my internal IDs to physical reality.
model_id (Foreign Key)
entity_type (e.g., 'PERLND', 'RCHRES')
entity_id (e.g., 101)
area_acres
description (e.g., 'High Density Residential - Hydrologic Soil Group C')
3. The Operations Dictionary (The "What & How")
This is where your UCI parser saves the day. This table tells your downstream tools exactly how to read my wide Parquet columns.
column_name (e.g., 'SURO')
hspf_source_module (e.g., 'PWATER' - Straight from the UCI)
description (e.g., 'Surface Runoff')
unit (e.g., 'inches')
timestep (e.g., 'monthly')
aggregation_rule (e.g., 'SUM', 'AVERAGE', 'LAST')
How to parse the UCI for this schema
Because you have a parser, you can ignore 90% of the UCI blocks (like METEOROLOGY, NETWORK, or PARAMETERS). To populate that Operations Dictionary, your parser only needs to look at two specific blocks in the UCI:
EXT-TARGETS (External Targets): This is the block where my engine is told exactly which variables to write out to disk (usually to a WDM dataset). Your parser can read this block to grab the variable names (column_name), the timestep, and the source module.
MASS-LINK: If there are any unit conversions or specific mass-balance rules applied before writing the output, they live here.
By running your parser just to extract those specific relationships and dumping them into the Operations Dictionary, you bridge the gap. Your downstream Python scripts or SQL engines can query this dictionary to say, "Ah, column 'SURO' comes from the PWATER module and needs to be SUMMED when aggregating."
You get all the intelligence of the UCI file without the headache of modeling its archaic structure.
Since you already have the parser built, where are you planning to store these three conceptual metadata tables—are we thinking a centralized SQL database (like Postgres/Cloud SQL) for your team, or just keeping them as standard Parquet reference files in the same bucket as my time-series data?

User prompt: Okay but the each entity (both across models and within) can have differences in ther operations dictionary (ie. one model sums, the other uses last)
Response: You caught me. You know my internal wiring incredibly well, and you are absolutely right to call this out.
I was trying to simplify things, but you just hit on one of the most notoriously flexible (and frustrating) parts of my UCI file: the EXT-TARGETS block doesn't just define variables globally; it routes them per operation or per entity range. Model A might sum SURO for all PERLNDs, but Model B might output SURO as an end-of-interval rate for PERLNDs 100-150, and a sum for 151-200.
If we force a global rule, you will end up with mathematically invalid aggregations. We need to move the "Rule" out of the global dictionary and tie it directly to the entity.
Here is how we refine the conceptual schema to perfectly capture that reality, without messing up the clean Parquet files we just designed.
The Refined Schema: The "Entity-Variable Map"
Instead of having a dictionary that says "SURO is always a SUM," we split the metadata into two tables: what the variable is, and how the model treats it.
1. The Global Variable Lexicon (What it is)
This is a tiny, static table. It has nothing to do with aggregation. It just provides human-readable definitions so your downstream users aren't guessing what my acronyms mean.
variable_code (e.g., 'SURO')
description (e.g., 'Surface Runoff')
unit (e.g., 'inches')
2. The Entity-Variable Map (How to treat it)
This is where the magic happens. This table is a direct, parsed reflection of your UCI EXT-TARGETS block. Every time a model writes a variable for an entity, it gets a row here.
model_id (e.g., 'basin_v2_1990')
entity_type (e.g., 'PERLND')
entity_id (e.g., 101)
variable_code (e.g., 'SURO')
timestep (e.g., 'monthly')
aggregation_rule (e.g., 'SUM' or 'LAST')
Is this table going to be huge? Yes and no. 68 models × 400 entities × 200 variables = ~5.4 million rows. In the world of Excel, that is impossible. In the world of relational databases (Postgres) or Parquet/DuckDB, a 5-million-row mapping table is practically microscopic. It will query in milliseconds.
How This Saves the Architecture
Notice what we didn't change: the massive 19-billion-row time-series Parquet files. They are still sitting perfectly flat in the "Short & Wide" format.
By handling this exception in the metadata layer, your query workflow becomes bulletproof:
A user asks for "Annual SURO for Model A."
The query engine joins the Time-Series Parquet with the Entity-Variable Map.
The query groups by entity_id. For PERLND 101, it sees the rule is SUM and sums the 12 months. For PERLND 150, it sees the rule is LAST and grabs the December value.
The user gets mathematically sound data, and my Parquet files never had to care about the physics.
You get all the flexibility of the UCI file, without having to build a database table for every single OPN SEQUENCE.
Since you have already built a parser that can handle the vast majority of the UCI file, how does it currently output the data it reads—does it generate JSON, CSVs, or just hold Python dictionaries in memory? Knowing this will help figure out the easiest way to populate this 5-million-row mapping table.

User prompt: Okay, so often if the model writes monthly output it also writes the annual, and if it writes daily it also writes monthly, and annual ect. Would it be better to store all of those in the parquet file or just the highest resolution and recreate the coarser resolutions with application logic?
Response: Ah, you have discovered my terrible habit of oversharing! If you leave the default settings on in my EXT-TARGETS block, I will happily spit out daily, monthly, and annual summaries of the exact same variable, bloating your file sizes and creating a massive headache.
Here is the definitive architectural answer: Store ONLY the highest resolution available for a given variable, and compute the coarser resolutions on the fly.
Drop the pre-aggregated monthly and annual outputs if the daily output exists. Do not store them in my Parquet files. Here is exactly why this is the best path forward.
1. The "Single Source of Truth" Trap
Data drift is a nightmare. Imagine a researcher realizes my daily SURO (runoff) for a specific storm event in 1998 looks wrong, so they apply a calibration patch to the daily Parquet file. If they forget to also update the pre-aggregated monthly and annual Parquet files, your data lake is now lying to you. The sum of the daily will no longer match the annual.
By only storing the base resolution, you guarantee a Single Source of Truth (SSOT).
2. You Already Built the Solution
Remember that Entity-Variable Map we just designed in the last step? The one with the aggregation_rule column?
You built that exactly for this scenario! Because your downstream application knows that SURO is a SUM and SSED is an AVERAGE, your application logic can safely and accurately roll up my daily data into monthly or annual data whenever a user asks for it. You don't need me to pre-calculate it in Fortran.
3. Modern Compute is Absurdly Fast
Ten years ago, computing 25 years of daily data into annual summaries on the fly would have crashed a dashboard. Today, if you are using columnar Parquet files and an engine like DuckDB, Polars, or Athena, aggregating millions of daily rows into annual summaries takes milliseconds. The compute overhead is negligible, but the storage savings and data integrity gains are massive.
How to handle the ingestion logic
When your parser is reading my EXT-TARGETS block in the UCI file to build the ingestion pipeline, program it with a simple hierarchy rule:
If I output SURO at Hourly, Daily, and Monthly -> Keep Hourly. (Drop the rest).
If I output AGWO at Daily and Monthly -> Keep Daily. (Drop the rest).
If I output TAET only at Monthly -> Keep Monthly. Store whatever you keep in the respective timestep folders (s3://.../timestep=hourly/, s3://.../timestep=daily/) that we laid out earlier.
You have the storage format, the partitioning, the metadata dictionaries, and the resolution strategy completely locked in. This architecture is incredibly solid. To make sure we don't hit any roadblocks on the final leg of this journey, what tools are your end-users actually going to use to query me once I am in these Parquet files (e.g., Python/Jupyter, a BI tool like PowerBI/Tableau, or a custom web dashboard)?

User prompt: Okay, that makes sense! A couple more things: 1: There is also a lot of logic that lives in the mass-link that dictates how things are routed or calculated. For example, there is no total phosphorous timeseries for perlnds and implnds. It requires summing the proportions dicated in the mass link. It's messy and I currently do that calculation on the fly but would require the mass-link table (and sometimes the network) to be stored as well. 2: Some models link to other models. I currently build a graph to make some routing analysis easier. It's mostly within a single model/UCI but sometimes I include links to other models if they connected.
Response: You are really pulling out all the stops now! The MASS-LINK and NETWORK blocks are the tangled nervous system of my simulation. You are officially dealing with the most complex, headache-inducing parts of my legacy Fortran logic.
But do not panic. Because we have already established a rock-solid separation between my Raw Data (the Parquet files) and my Metadata (the dictionaries), accommodating these two new requirements is actually incredibly elegant. We just need to add two specific conceptual tables to your metadata layer.
Here is how we handle the messy math and the routing.
1. The Mass-Link Problem: "The Recipe Book"
You are completely right: variables like Total Phosphorus (TP) or Total Nitrogen (TN) often don't exist in my raw output. They are Frankenstein variables, stitched together by taking a fraction of SOQO (sediment wash-off), a dash of PO4 (dissolved phosphate), and routing it all through a MASS-LINK multiplier.
The Golden Rule: Do not calculate these on the fly during the extraction/ingestion phase and save them to Parquet. If you ever realize a mass-link multiplier was wrong, you'd have to regenerate all 25 years of Parquet files.
Instead, we add a Derived Variables Dictionary (The Recipe Book) to your metadata layer.
The Schema:
derived_variable (String - e.g., 'TOTAL_P')
model_id (String - e.g., 'basin_v2_1990')
entity_type (String - e.g., 'PERLND')
source_variable (String - e.g., 'SOQO')
multiplier (Float - e.g., 0.15)
operation (String - e.g., 'ADD')
How it works in your application: When your user's script or dashboard asks for TOTAL_P for PERLND 100, your application checks the Recipe Book. It sees that TOTAL_P = (SOQO * 0.15) + (PO4 * 1.0). The query engine (like DuckDB or Polars) dynamically pulls just SOQO and PO4 from the Parquet files, applies the multipliers, sums them up, and hands the user TOTAL_P.
You get perfect accuracy, your Parquet files stay pristine, and if you ever need to fix a mass-link error, you literally just update one row in this tiny metadata table.
2. The Routing Problem: "The Global Edge List"
I love that you are already building a graph! Hydrology is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), and mapping my NETWORK block into a modern graph structure unlocks incredible analytical power.
Since you are already dealing with models that link to other models (e.g., an upstream watershed model feeding a boundary condition of a downstream river model), you need a topology table that transcends individual UCI files.
We will create a Global Edge List. This is a standard adjacency list that tools like NetworkX (Python) or graph databases (Neo4j) can consume instantly.
The Schema:
source_model_id (String - e.g., 'upstream_basin_A')
source_entity (String - e.g., 'RCHRES_50')
target_model_id (String - e.g., 'downstream_basin_B')
target_entity (String - e.g., 'RCHRES_1')
flow_fraction (Float - e.g., 1.0. Crucial for when a reach splits its flow into two downstream reaches.)
Why this is incredibly powerful: If you store this edge list in your metadata database, you can write automated scripts for trace-back analysis. If a user notices a massive spike in sediment in downstream_basin_B at RCHRES_1, they can query the Global Edge List to instantly find all upstream contributing PERLNDs across all connected models, grab their entity IDs, and pull their Parquet time-series data to find the culprit.
The Final Metadata Architecture
To bring it all together, your overarching storage solution now looks like this:
The Heavy Lifting (Cloud Storage / Data Lake)
Hourly_Parquet_Files (Short & Wide, raw data only)
Daily_Parquet_Files (Short & Wide, raw data only)
The Brains (Metadata Database / PostgreSQL or DuckDB)
Model Catalog: Who, what, and when.
Entity Map: What is this sub-basin and how big is it?
Global Variable Lexicon: What do these acronyms mean?
Entity-Variable Map: Is this a SUM or an AVERAGE?
Derived Variables (Recipe Book): How do I calculate Total Phosphorus?
Global Edge List: Where does the water go?
This is a beautiful, cloud-native architecture. You have successfully decoupled my stubborn 1970s physics from modern 2020s data engineering!
Since we have the data storage and metadata schemas completely locked in, I am curious about the orchestration: how are you planning to trigger and manage this massive pipeline that parses the UCI, extracts my data, and writes these billions of rows into Parquet?

User prompt: I have python code that parses most of the uci into a dictionary of pandas dataframes and other python code that parses the hbn files into pandas dataframes. I am hoping that having the model outputs in this parquet and database format will make designing visualization and tableau/power BI reports easier. I also want to know how extensible this current architecture is. For now this is just for creating visualization of the final models but could I use this same concept for interative calibration of a single model, or for storing multiple versions of the same model. Related to this will be the need to link the model outputs to observation data. Are there any potential decisions made so far that could lock me in to a certain approach or incur technical debt in the future?
Response: It is great that you already have the Python parsing logic built. Translating those legacy HBN and UCI files into Pandas DataFrames is the hardest part of data extraction. Since you already have the data in memory as DataFrames, writing them to partitioned Parquet files is just a .to_parquet() method away.
To answer your first question: Yes, this will make visualization in Tableau or Power BI exponentially easier. What we have designed is effectively a modern "Star Schema." Your BI tools will ingest the Parquet files as the central "Fact Table" and the metadata dictionaries as the surrounding "Dimension Tables."
However, you are very smart to ask about technical debt and lock-in right now. The architecture we designed is highly extensible for most of your goals, but there is one specific use case where this architecture will actively fight you.
Here is a candid look at how your architecture handles the future, and where the traps are.
1. Storing Multiple Versions (Highly Extensible)
This architecture handles model versioning perfectly. Because we included model_id as the root partition (e.g., s3://.../timestep=hourly/model_id=basin_v1/) and in the Model Catalog metadata table, you are completely future-proofed.
If you run a new climate scenario, you just write a new folder (model_id=basin_v1_rcp85) and add one row to your catalog.
Downstream, a Tableau dashboard can easily compare basin_v1 against basin_v1_rcp85 by just grouping by model_id.
2. Linking to Observation Data (Highly Extensible)
This is very easy, provided you treat observations as a "peer" to your models rather than trying to mash them into the same files.
The Strategy: Create a dedicated model_id called OBSERVATIONS (or create a parallel root folder like s3://hspf_observations/).
Map the USGS gauge IDs or weather station IDs into your Entity Map.
Use the same "Short & Wide" schema.
This allows your BI tools to plot OBSERVATIONS right alongside model_id=basin_v2 on the exact same axis.
3. Interactive Calibration (The Danger Zone)
Here is where this architecture will fail you. Do not use Parquet for interactive, real-time calibration.
Parquet is an immutable, append-only format. It is designed for "write-once, read-many" workloads. During interactive calibration, a hydrologist runs a model, looks at the output, tweaks a parameter in the UCI (like INFILT or LZSN), and runs the model again to overwrite the previous run.
If you try to do this with Parquet, you will have to rewrite the entire Parquet file every single time the model runs, which is slow and creates a massive trail of dead files in cloud storage.
The Fix: Keep interactive calibration completely out of the Parquet data lake. Use in-memory Pandas, a local SQLite database, or a tool like MLflow to track calibration iterations. Once the model is officially "calibrated," then publish that final run to the Parquet architecture as a permanent version.
Potential Technical Debt & Lock-in Warnings
If you proceed with this architecture, keep your eyes on these two potential sources of technical debt:
The "Wide vs. Long" BI Problem
We chose the "Short & Wide" Parquet format (columns for SURO, AGWO, etc.) because it is the most efficient way to store and query the data on disk. However, BI tools like Tableau sometimes prefer "Long" formats (where Variable_Name is a column) to create dynamic filters and color legends.
The Debt: If you try to force Tableau to unpivot 200 columns on the fly for millions of rows, it will drag.
The Mitigation: You are not locked in, but you will likely need an intermediate SQL layer (like DuckDB or AWS Athena) to act as a bridge. You can write a SQL VIEW that dynamically unpivots just the 5 or 6 variables the Tableau dashboard actually needs, rather than unpivoting the raw data.
Metadata Drift
The absolute biggest risk in this architecture is the separation of the metadata from the raw data.
The Debt: If a researcher updates a MASS-LINK routing rule in the UCI, runs the model, and updates the Parquet files, but forgets to run the Python script that updates your PostgreSQL metadata database, your dashboards will silently calculate the wrong Total Phosphorus.
The Mitigation: You must lock these together in your Python pipeline. The script that writes the Parquet files must be the exact same script that updates the metadata database in the same transaction.
You are in a great position to build this out. Since you are planning to connect this to Tableau/Power BI, are you planning to have those tools connect directly to the raw Parquet files, or are you planning to use an intermediate query engine like Athena, Snowflake, or DuckDB to serve up the data?

User prompt: Okay, one challenge I have is that I would like a better way to filter on model_id. What you proposed earlier encoded information in the model_id (name_version_climatescenarior) I often get stuck wondering how many fields I should use to describe a unique model. I currently distinguish using a natural key of name, scenario, version, and run but I can always think of some instances where the natural key might not work very well and I'm forced to put information into one of these fields that doesn't really fit there.
Response: Ah, you have just hit one of the oldest traps in data engineering: the Overloaded Key problem.
When you try to cram metadata into a string (like basin_v2_rcp85_calib3) or force it into a rigid set of columns (name, scenario, version, run), the universe will inevitably invent a new parameter that breaks your schema. What happens when you change the land-use dataset? Is that a "version" or a "scenario"? What if you change the precipitation gauge?
You end up agonizing over semantics, and your natural key becomes a dumping ground.
To fix this, we need to completely separate identification from description. Here is the modern approach to structuring your Model Catalog.
1. The Storage Layer: Use a Meaningless Surrogate Key
In your Parquet files and your cloud storage folders, stop trying to make the folder name readable. Use a Surrogate Key—a completely meaningless, unique identifier for every single time you hit "run" on my executable.
You can use a UUID (e.g., a1b2c3d4...) or a simple auto-incrementing integer or timestamp (e.g., run_20260812_0922).
Your Parquet partition now looks like this: s3://hspf_lake/timestep=hourly/run_id=a1b2c3d4/
It knows nothing about scenarios or versions. It only knows that it holds the data for run a1b2c3d4.
2. The Metadata Layer: The "Tagging" System
All the descriptive logic moves into your Model Catalog database table. To prevent the rigid column problem, we use a hybrid schema.
You keep a few absolute, undeniable columns (the "Core"), and you dump everything else into a flexible JSON / Key-Value column (the "Flex").
The Schema:
run_id (String, Primary Key) - e.g., 'a1b2c3d4'
model_name (String) - e.g., 'Cedar_River_Basin' (The physical geographic model)
run_timestamp (Datetime) - e.g., '2026-08-12 09:22:00'
attributes (JSONB / Dictionary) - This is where the magic happens.
Inside the attributes JSON, you put whatever you want, whenever you want:
{
  "version": "2.1",
  "climate_scenario": "RCP8.5",
  "land_use_year": "2020",
  "precip_source": "NEXRAD",
  "calibration_phase": " hydrology_only",
  "experimental_tweak": "increased_LZSN_by_10_percent"
}


Why this is a superpower for you:
Zero Technical Debt: If tomorrow you decide to test a new evaporation algorithm, you don't need to alter your database schema or figure out if it belongs in the scenario or version column. You just add "evap_alg": "penman" to the JSON payload for that run.
Perfect for BI Tools: Modern query engines (like PostgreSQL, DuckDB, Athena, or Snowflake) can query directly inside JSON columns.
Dynamic Filtering: You can create a SQL View for Tableau that flattens this out. When your users are in Power BI, they can use drop-downs to filter by climate_scenario = RCP8.5 AND precip_source = NEXRAD, and the database instantly hands them the run_ids that match, which then fetches the correct Parquet partitions.
By stripping the meaning out of the ID and embracing a flexible JSON metadata structure, you let my model runs be as weird, experimental, and nuanced as you need them to be without breaking your architecture.
Since modern databases handle this JSON flattening effortlessly, what backend system (e.g., PostgreSQL, DuckDB, AWS Athena, SQLite) are you currently planning to use to manage this metadata and serve it to Tableau/Power BI?

User prompt: Okay, when would you decide something is a core filed vs a json attribute? Why not have everything in the json dictionary?
Response: That is exactly the right question to ask. The temptation to throw everything into a JSON bucket is incredibly strong—it feels like the ultimate freedom. But going 100% JSON essentially turns your structured SQL database into a NoSQL document store, which introduces a new set of headaches.
Here is a candid look at why you shouldn't put everything in JSON, followed by the exact framework data engineers use to decide what gets a dedicated column versus what goes into the JSON "flex" field.
Why Not Put Everything in JSON?
While modern databases (like PostgreSQL, DuckDB, or Snowflake) are fantastic at parsing JSON, it is not a perfect substitute for a native column for three critical reasons:
Performance and Indexing: Searching for a value inside a JSON blob is computationally heavier than searching a standard column. While you can create special indexes on JSON fields (like GIN indexes in Postgres), native B-tree indexes on standard columns are simply faster, smaller, and easier to manage.
Data Integrity (The Wild West): Standard columns enforce rules. If you have a run_timestamp column of type DATETIME, the database will physically reject a string like "yesterday". In a JSON blob, you can accidentally insert anything, leading to silent data corruption that breaks your downstream BI dashboards.
BI Tool Ergonomics: Tools like Tableau and Power BI prefer flat, tabular data. While you can write SQL views to flatten JSON for them, forcing the database to unpack a massive JSON blob just to find the primary key or the model's name every time a user loads a dashboard will cause frustrating load times.
The Decision Framework: Core vs. Flex
To strike the perfect balance, you split the difference. Here is how you decide where a piece of information belongs.
1. When to make it a Core Field (Dedicated Column)
A field deserves its own dedicated column if it meets one or more of these criteria:
Universal: Every single record will absolutely have this value (e.g., run_id, timestamp).
Relational: You use this field to JOIN to other tables (e.g., model_name joining to a geographic boundary table).
Filter/Sort Heavy: This is a primary dimension you will constantly group by or sort by in your dashboards (e.g., user_who_ran_model).
Strictly Typed: You need the database to mathematically guarantee the data type (e.g., a timestamp or a boolean).
2. When to put it in the JSON Attribute Dictionary
A piece of data belongs in the JSON field if it fits this profile:
Sparse or Optional: Only some models will use it. (e.g., A snowmelt_algorithm parameter only matters for models in Minnesota, not Florida).
Highly Volatile: The definition or existence of this parameter changes frequently as your research evolves.
Deeply Nested: The data naturally has a hierarchy (e.g., storing a list of the 5 specific land-use datasets used to generate the scenario).
Informational: It is useful for a researcher to look at, but you aren't going to build a pie chart out of it.
The Golden Rule of Hybrid Schemas
If a piece of data defines identity, relationship, or time, make it a column. If it defines characteristics, tweaks, or nuances, put it in the JSON dictionary.
Given this framework, what are the 3 or 4 absolute core fields you think every single one of your HSPF model runs will always share, regardless of what scenario or version you are testing?

User prompt: Okay some potential core fields could be: repository_name scenario version run_id Other flex information could include: the start and end date of the model simulation period, the last time the model was extended, who extended the model, the last time the model was calibrated and who did the calibration, any upstream and/or downstream models, HUC8 names associated with the model, Give me some more ideas of information that could be in these two categories. Also, some of this information is within the UCI file that gets parsed (for example the start and end of the simulation) so not sure when it should be a flex field or in a whole separate table.
Response: You are thinking exactly like a data architect now. You have a great list started, but I am going to apply a little bit of tough love and gently reorganize your ideas based on the "Core vs. Flex" framework we just established, and then I'll add some new ideas to your arsenal.
Here is how we should categorize your ideas, along with some additions and the answer to your UCI parsing question.
1. Refining Your Core Fields
Remember the golden rule for Core fields: Identity, Relationship, and Time. * Keep these as Core: * run_id (Primary Key - UUID or timestamp-based) * repository_name (Foreign Key - Links to your physical watershed model)
Move these to Flex:
scenario and version. Why? Because this is exactly how you get trapped in semantic arguments later! If you update the land use but keep the same climate, is that a new scenario or a new version? Keep these out of the Core so your schema never breaks when definitions change.
Add these new Core ideas:
run_timestamp: When did the Python script actually execute this model? (Crucial for debugging).
execution_user: Who clicked "run"? (e.g., 'jdoe' or 'automated_pipeline').
storage_path: The URI pointing to where the Parquet files live (e.g., s3://hspf_lake/run_id=a1b2/).
sim_start_date & sim_end_date: (Answering your UCI question!) Even though these are parsed from the GLOBAL block of the UCI, they define time bounds. Because they are universal to every run and highly filterable in BI tools, they earn the right to be native Core columns.
2. Refining Your Flex Attributes (The JSON Dictionary)
The JSON field is for characteristics, nuances, and metadata that might change shape over time.
Keep these as Flex:
scenario and version (e.g., "scenario": "RCP8.5", "version": "2.1")
last_extended_date and extended_by
last_calibrated_date and calibrated_by
huc8_list: (e.g., ["07080201", "07080202"])
Re-route this completely:
upstream_models / downstream_models. Why? Do not put this in the JSON. This belongs in the Global Edge List table we designed earlier. Relationships between models need to be queryable as a graph, not hidden inside a JSON blob.
Add these new Flex ideas:
git_commit_hash: If your UCI files or Python scripts are in Git, tag the run with the commit hash! If a run looks weird, you know exactly what the code looked like on that day.
hspf_engine_version: e.g., "WinHSPF 12.2" vs. "Custom Fortran Build".
active_modules: e.g., ["PERLND", "IMPLND", "RCHRES", "BMPRAC"] (Parsed directly from the UCI).
calibration_metrics: If this run was a final calibration, you could store "nse_score": 0.82 or "rsquared": 0.90 right in the metadata.
How to Handle Data Parsed from the UCI
You brought up a fantastic architectural question: if a parameter is inside the UCI file, does it go in the Flex JSON, or a separate table?
The Rule of Thumb: What level of granularity is it?
Run-Level Granularity (Goes in the Catalog): If the UCI parameter applies to the entire simulation (like the GLOBAL block's start/end dates, or which modules are turned on), it goes into the Run Catalog (either as a Core column like dates, or a Flex JSON attribute).
Entity-Level Granularity (Goes in a Separate Table): If you are parsing physical watershed parameters from the PERLND or RCHRES blocks (e.g., LZSN is 4.5 for PERLND 100, INFILT is 0.1), do not put this in the Run Catalog. That data is too granular. That information belongs in your Entity Map table, or a dedicated model_parameters table, linked by the run_id.
By organizing it this way, your Run Catalog stays lightweight and fast for your BI tools to query, while the heavy physical parameters remain organized in their own dedicated tables.
Now that we have this incredibly robust, metadata-driven architecture mapped out, I have to ask about the engine driving it: where is your Python parsing code actually running? Are you running these extractions locally on a laptop, or are you deploying this pipeline to the cloud using a tool like Apache Airflow, AWS Batch, or Databricks?

User prompt: Okay relating to the UCI data, I'm not sure how much of it too include and if it should be long or wide. Attached are files for how I currently handle this, focus more on what information in the UCI should be stored where and how it should be grouped and represented.
Response: I have looked through your build_warehouse.py and warehouse.py code. First off, I have to commend your build_parameter_table function. The way you melt the HSPF tables, join them with the parser definitions, and split them by data type (R for parameters, I for flags, C for properties) is incredibly clean Python data engineering. You have successfully wrangled the chaotic Fortran blocks into a strict Entity-Attribute-Value (EAV) model.
To answer your question directly: you are currently storing the parameters in a Long (EAV) format, and while that is excellent for database extensibility, it is going to cause a massive headache in Tableau or Power BI. Here is exactly how you should structure the UCI data, resolving the "Long vs. Wide" debate and grouping the tables logically for analytical ease.
The Long vs. Wide Dilemma
Hydrologists think in Wide format (e.g., "Show me PERLND 100 where LZSN is 4.5 AND INFILT is 0.1"). Your database (uci.parameters) is stored in Long format (e.g., "Find row where parameter_name = 'LZSN' and value = 4.5, then self-join to find where parameter_name = 'INFILT' and value = 0.1").
BI tools like Tableau process Wide data effortlessly but will drag to a halt if you force them to pivot millions of long-format rows on the fly or perform complex self-joins to filter by multiple parameters.
The Solution: Store Long, Serve Wide (Via Views) Do not change your Python extraction code! It is robust. Instead, leverage DuckDB to bridge the gap. Keep your physical tables exactly as they are (uci.parameters, uci.flags), but create DuckDB Views that PIVOT this data into wide tables for Tableau.
You would create three specific Wide Views:
view_perlnd_params (One row per PERLND, columns for LZSN, INFILT, UZSN, etc.)
view_implnd_params (One row per IMPLND, columns for LSUR, SLSUR, etc.)
view_rchres_params (One row per RCHRES, columns for LEN, DELTH, etc.)
How to Group and Represent the UCI Data
Looking at your extraction functions, you have 11 different tables. To make this intuitive for reporting, you should conceptually group them into four main buckets.
1. The Nodes (Physical Entities)
What it includes: OPN SEQUENCE (your uci.operations table), plus the Wide Views of your parameters, flags, and properties.
How it should be represented: This is your primary Entity Map. The OPN SEQUENCE acts as the master list of all valid sub-basins and reaches. In Tableau, you will join the wide parameter views to this operations table.
2. The Edges (Routing & Topology)
What it includes: SCHEMATIC and NETWORK.
How it should be represented: In your code, you have build_schematic_table and build_network_table. Conceptually, these are exactly the same thing: they are directed edges in a graph (Source -> Target). You should ideally stack or union these together into a single uci.routing view or table. A hydrologist doesn't usually care if the routing was defined in the SCHEMATIC block (area-based) or NETWORK block (volume-based); they just want to know where the water goes.
3. The Logic Rules (Translation Tables)
What it includes: MASS-LINK, EXT SOURCES, EXT TARGETS, and GENER.
How it should be represented: These are your dictionaries and recipe books.
Keep MASS-LINK exactly as you have it. As discussed earlier, this is the recipe for calculating variables like Total Phosphorus.
EXT SOURCES is just mapping external timeseries (like a WDM precipitation gauge) to a PERLND. This should be a direct lookup table in your BI tool.
4. The Lookups (Curves and Functions)
What it includes: FTABLES.
How it should be represented: Keep this separate, exactly as you are doing. FTABLES are purely mathematical lookup curves (Depth vs. Area vs. Volume vs. Outflow) for reaches. They don't join cleanly to a flat parameter table. They belong in their own dedicated table (uci.ftables) that a user can query if they want to plot the stage-storage-discharge curve of a specific reach.
What You Can Safely Drop
FILES Block: Your build_files_table extracts the WDM file paths. Unless you are specifically debugging broken file links, this is purely operational metadata. It doesn't belong in the analytical warehouse structure; it belongs in the JSON "Flex" attributes dictionary we discussed for the Model Catalog.
By keeping your Python ingestion exactly as it is, but layering DuckDB views on top to present the data as Wide Nodes, Unified Edges, and Logic Rules, you give Tableau the exact shape of data it needs to run blazingly fast.
Since DuckDB is central to your architecture here, are you planning to have your BI tools connect directly to the live DuckDB file via ODBC/JDBC, or will you be exporting these curated DuckDB views out to flat Parquet files for ingestion?

User prompt: Okay but why store this information long while the model output I am storing wide?
Response: That is the absolute perfect question to ask. It feels entirely counterintuitive to use two completely different database paradigms—Wide for my timeseries output, and Long (Entity-Attribute-Value) for my UCI metadata—in the exact same architecture.
It looks like a contradiction, but it is actually a highly intentional design pattern called Polyglot Persistence. You are choosing the shape of the data based on its physical physics and how it behaves.
Here is exactly why we split the strategy.
1. Why My Model Output MUST Be Wide (Volume & Compression)
My timeseries outputs (the Parquet files) are massive, continuous, and highly predictable. I spit out hourly data for decades.
If you tried to store my timeseries in a Long format, your schema would look like this: Timestamp | Entity_ID | Variable_Name | Value.
For a single sub-basin over 20 years, generating 10 variables (SURO, AGWO, etc.), you are generating 1.7 million rows per sub-basin. * Multiply that by 100 sub-basins, and you have 170 million rows just for one model run.
Your BI tool would have to scan millions of rows and execute massive aggregations just to plot a simple hydrograph.
By storing it Wide in Parquet (Timestamp | Entity_ID | SURO | AGWO | ...), you keep the row count locked to the timestamp. Furthermore, Parquet is a columnar format. If Tableau only asks for SURO, Parquet completely ignores the other columns, making the query lightning-fast and keeping cloud storage costs near zero.
2. Why My UCI Parameters MUST Be Long (Flexibility & Sparsity)
My UCI parameters behave in the exact opposite way. They are tiny in volume, but incredibly chaotic, heterogeneous, and sparse.
A PERLND has parameters like LZSN and INFILT. A RCHRES has parameters like LEN and DELTH. If you tried to build a native Wide table in your DuckDB warehouse to hold all parameters for all entities, you would create the "Sparse Matrix of Death."
Your table would need 300+ columns to account for every possible Fortran variable.
For a PERLND row, the LEN and DELTH columns would be NULL.
For a RCHRES row, the LZSN and INFILT columns would be NULL.
The Fatal Flaw: If a researcher ever activates a new module (like Snowmelt or Water Quality) that requires a brand new parameter, your Python script would crash because the target column wouldn't exist in the database. You would have to constantly write ALTER TABLE SQL statements.
By storing the UCI data Long (Entity_ID | Parameter_Name | Value), your database schema is completely immune to change. If you add 50 new parameters tomorrow, you don't add columns; you just add rows. It is infinitely extensible.
The Grand Compromise: "Schema on Read"
You are acting as the bridge between two worlds: Data Engineering and Data Analytics.
For Storage (Engineering): You store the UCI Long so your Python pipeline never breaks and never has to deal with database migrations.
For Consumption (Analytics): You use DuckDB PIVOT Views to temporarily project that Long data into Wide tables so Tableau and Power BI don't choke.
It is the best of both worlds: bulletproof pipelines on the backend, and snappy dashboards on the frontend.
Since DuckDB is playing this crucial role of translating your robust Long tables into BI-friendly Wide views, I am curious about its lifecycle in your architecture: will this DuckDB database be an ephemeral, temporary file that your Python script spins up just to process data and then deletes, or will it be a persistent, central database file that your BI tools connect to live?

User prompt: Okay, I am using DuckDB but it feels like this is a somewhat unproven and not the most widley adopted tool. I've been burned in the past by a database being decommisioned (kudzu) and want to avoid that situation. What is the production grade tools out there that people use for this type of project?
Response: It is completely understandable to have "Kudzu PTSD." When you build a beautiful, complex data architecture, the last thing you want is for the foundation to be deprecated, leaving you with thousands of lines of orphaned code.
Before we look at the enterprise giants, I want to offer a brief defense of DuckDB: it is not a fad. It is essentially the "SQLite for Analytics." Because it runs in-process and is open-source, even if the company behind it (MotherDuck) disappeared tomorrow, your Python environment and the DuckDB files would continue to work forever.
However, you are correct that DuckDB is fundamentally a single-node, local compute engine. If you are deploying this to a corporate environment, expecting dozens of concurrent users to hit Tableau dashboards hooked up to terabytes of model outputs, DuckDB will eventually become a bottleneck.
What you have organically designed here is called a Data Lakehouse architecture (Parquet files in cloud storage + a SQL query layer). Here are the undisputed, production-grade enterprise tools that Fortune 500 companies use for this exact setup, none of which are going anywhere anytime soon.
1. Amazon Athena (and Open-Source Trino/Presto)
If your Parquet files are sitting in AWS S3, this is the most direct upgrade from DuckDB. Athena is a serverless, distributed SQL query engine designed specifically to read data directly from cloud storage.
How it works: You do not "load" data into Athena. You just point it at your S3 bucket (e.g., s3://hspf_lake/), tell it the schema, and it queries the Parquet files in place.
The Metadata: It uses the AWS Glue Data Catalog to store the table definitions and partitions.
Why it is bulletproof: It is managed by AWS and based on Trino/Presto (created by Facebook to query their massive data lake).
BI Fit: Tableau and Power BI have native, highly optimized connectors for Athena.
2. Snowflake
Snowflake is the current industry heavyweight for cloud data warehousing. If your organization has the budget and wants a zero-maintenance, highly governed system, this is the default choice.
How it works: Snowflake separates storage from compute. You can either ingest your Parquet files natively into Snowflake's internal storage, or you can create External Tables where Snowflake acts exactly like Athena and queries your Parquet files directly in S3, Azure Blob, or Google Cloud Storage.
The Metadata: Snowflake handles JSON (your Flex attributes) beautifully with native querying capabilities, and creating the Wide Views for your Long UCI parameters is incredibly fast.
Why it is bulletproof: It is a massive, publicly traded company that has essentially defined the modern data stack.
3. Databricks (Apache Spark)
Databricks was founded by the original creators of Apache Spark. It is an engineering powerhouse, heavily favored by organizations that mix heavy data science/machine learning with traditional BI.
How it works: It natively uses a format called Delta Lake (which is just Parquet files with an open-source transaction log wrapped around them).
The Edge for HSPF: If you ever wanted to scale your Python pipeline to run 10,000 model calibrations simultaneously and write the outputs in parallel, Databricks was built for exactly that kind of distributed processing.
Why it is bulletproof: Like Snowflake, it is an absolute titan in the data infrastructure space.
The Metadata Alternative: PostgreSQL
While Athena, Snowflake, and Databricks are amazing for chewing through the massive Parquet output files, they can sometimes be overkill for managing the Model Catalog and the UCI Metadata.
If you want the ultimate, sleep-well-at-night, unkillable database just for your metadata, use PostgreSQL.
It has been actively developed since 1989. It will outlive us all.
It has a native JSONB column type that is incredibly efficient for the "Flex" attributes we discussed.
You can easily build your Long EAV tables (uci.parameters) and create Wide Views on top of them.
The Hybrid Architecture: Many organizations store their massive timeseries Parquet files in S3 (queried by Athena), but store their model catalogs and metadata in a standard PostgreSQL database. Tableau can easily connect to both and blend the data in the dashboard.
The Verdict: How to future-proof your project
You do not need to change your Python pipeline today. Your approach of parsing into Pandas and writing out to Parquet is universally compatible.
If you want to move away from DuckDB to a production-grade enterprise stack, the easiest migration path is AWS Athena. It behaves very similarly to what you are doing now—treating Parquet files as tables—but scales to infinity without the risk of an unsupported database engine.

User prompt: Okay I should have mentioned that the alternative needs to be open source!
Response: That completely changes the landscape! It is a very smart constraint. Relying on open-source infrastructure is the best way to guarantee you will never be locked into a vendor's pricing model or left stranded if a proprietary tool is deprecated.
If we strip away the managed SaaS layers of Athena, Snowflake, and Databricks, what we are left with are the open-source engines that those massive companies actually built their platforms on top of.
Here is the production-grade, 100% open-source stack for building a Data Lakehouse that will outlive us all.
1. The Direct "Athena" Alternative: Trino (formerly PrestoSQL)
If you liked the sound of AWS Athena (leaving the Parquet files in storage and using a distributed SQL engine to query them on the fly), Trino is exactly what you need. In fact, AWS Athena was originally built on top of Presto/Trino.
What it is: A blazing-fast, distributed SQL query engine designed specifically for massive Data Lakes. It was originally built by Facebook to query their petabytes of internal data.
How it works for you: You keep your Parquet files exactly where they are. You spin up a Trino cluster, point it at your storage, and it acts as the translation layer.
BI Integration: Tableau and Power BI have native Trino connectors. When a user clicks a filter in Tableau, Tableau sends SQL to Trino, Trino scans the specific Parquet columns, and returns the result.
Longevity: It is managed by the Trino Software Foundation, has a massive open-source community, and is heavily backed by a company called Starburst. It is not going anywhere.
2. The Direct "Databricks" Alternative: Apache Spark + Apache Iceberg
Databricks is essentially just a premium, managed wrapper around Apache Spark. If you want the power of Databricks for free, you build it yourself with Spark.
Apache Spark: The undisputed king of open-source big data processing. You can use PySpark to rewrite your Python ingestion pipeline so it can parse 1,000 HSPF models in parallel across a cluster of machines.
Apache Iceberg (The Secret Weapon): Parquet is just a file format. If you want your Parquet files to behave like a real database (with UPDATE, DELETE, and TIME TRAVEL capabilities), you wrap them in an open-source table format like Apache Iceberg (originally built by Netflix) or Delta Lake.
Why this rocks: If you use PySpark to write Iceberg tables, your BI tools can query them with absolute reliability, and you never have to worry about the "immutable" nature of Parquet if you need to fix a bad data run.
3. The Unkillable Metadata Anchor: PostgreSQL
We discussed this briefly, but it is worth cementing: PostgreSQL is the greatest open-source relational database on the planet. * Do not try to use Trino or Spark to manage your run_id, version, or model_name catalogs.
Use PostgreSQL for your Long tables (the UCI parameters, Flags, Properties) and the flexible JSON attributes.
The magic trick: Trino has a feature called "Federated Querying." You can connect Trino to both your Parquet files and your PostgreSQL database simultaneously. You can write a single SQL view in Trino that joins the raw timeseries data from Parquet with the metadata from Postgres, serving a perfectly clean, unified table to Tableau.
The Recommended Open-Source Architecture
If you want a highly scalable, future-proof, 100% open-source stack that prevents any "Kudzu" situations, here is your blueprint:
Ingestion: Python (Pandas/DuckDB locally) → Writes Parquet/Iceberg files to your storage layer.
Metadata: Python writes your UCI parsing data and JSON run catalogs to PostgreSQL.
Compute/Serving: Trino sits in the middle. It federates the Parquet files and the PostgreSQL database.
Visualization: Tableau/Power BI connects only to Trino.
This gives you enterprise-grade performance with zero licensing fees and zero risk of vendor deprecation.
Since you are looking at open-source deployments, where is this infrastructure going to live? Are you deploying this on bare-metal on-premise servers at your organization, or will you be spinning up your own virtual machines in a cloud environment like AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud?

User prompt: Okay, well right now this will all live on a single machine. I have access to a bit of storage on a single agency server/drive where I was thinking this could live so multiple people could access it at once.
Response: This changes the game entirely! Welcome to the classic reality of government and agency IT constraints. We can officially throw Trino, Apache Spark, and distributed computing out the window. If you try to run those on a single server, you will just eat up all your RAM with Java overhead.
Running this on a single agency server or a shared network drive is completely doable, but it introduces one massive danger that you must avoid, and it dictates exactly how you should set this up.
The Danger Zone: Network File Locking
When multiple people want to access data at the same time, you cannot use a file-based database like DuckDB or SQLite stored on a shared network drive (e.g., an SMB or NFS drive).
If User A runs a Python script that writes to warehouse.db at the exact same moment User B opens a Tableau dashboard connected to warehouse.db, the network drive's file-locking mechanism will panic.
Best case scenario: User B's dashboard times out. Worst case scenario: the .db file is permanently corrupted.
Because you have multiple concurrent users, you must use a true client-server database for your metadata. Here is the bulletproof architecture for a single agency machine.
The Single-Server Blueprint
You will split your server into two distinct roles: a File Share (for the heavy Parquet outputs) and an Active Service (for the metadata and concurrent users).
1. The Heavy Lifting: Parquet on the Network Drive
Where it lives: A standard shared folder on the server (e.g., Z:\HSPF_Lakehouse\Outputs\).
Why it works: Parquet files are static. Your Python script writes them once, and they never change. Because they are read-only for your users, multiple Tableau dashboards can read the same Parquet file simultaneously over the network without any file-locking issues.
The Format: Keep this exactly as we discussed. "Wide" format, partitioned by run_id.
2. The Brains: PostgreSQL Installed on the Server
Where it lives: You install PostgreSQL directly on this single agency server, running as a background service (usually on port 5432).
Why it works: PostgreSQL is designed specifically to handle hundreds of concurrent users reading and writing at the same time. It manages all the locking in memory so your database never corrupts.
The Format: This holds your "Long" UCI EAV tables, your JSON attributes dictionary, and the Wide Views we discussed.
3. The Orchestration (Your Python Code)
Your Python script (which can be run from your local laptop or scheduled on the server) acts as the writer. When a model finishes running, the script:
Opens a connection to the PostgreSQL server and INSERTS the new metadata (Run ID, parameters, JSON).
Writes the massive Parquet files to the shared Z:\ drive.
4. The Consumption (Tableau / Power BI)
When a user opens a dashboard on their local computer, the BI tool does two things:
Connects to the PostgreSQL server (via ODBC/JDBC) to get the metadata, populate the drop-down filters, and fetch the Wide Parameter Views.
Connects directly to the Z:\ drive to read the Parquet files for the timeseries plots.
(Note: Both Tableau and Power BI allow you to blend/join data from a PostgreSQL database and a local/network folder of Parquet files directly inside the dashboard).
What to do with your current DuckDB code?
You don't have to throw away the logic in build_warehouse.py! You just change the destination. Instead of duckdb.connect(), you will use a library like SQLAlchemy or psycopg2 in Python to push those Pandas DataFrames into PostgreSQL. The logic of how you parse the UCI and shape the data remains exactly the same.
This architecture gives you the absolute best performance possible on a single machine, protects you from network drive corruption, and keeps the whole system 100% open-source and free.
Since you are relying on a single agency server, who controls the IT permissions? Are you allowed to install a service like PostgreSQL on this machine yourself, or is it strictly a file storage drive where you can only dump files?

User prompt: No they are pretty strict about having floating databases around so unlikely I would be able to get a postgres instance on the server as it's supposed to just be for file storage/sharing. I guess I want to develop the architecture and application on my local machine first but in a way that could scale if neccessary. Could I use sqlite instead as it does allow for concurrent users?
Response: That is classic agency IT! "Here is a massive hard drive, but please do not run any actual compute on it." It is a very common hurdle, and it forces us to get creative.
I have to stop you right there regarding SQLite, though. You are stepping toward a very famous data engineering trap.
The SQLite Network Drive Trap
It is true that SQLite allows for concurrent readers, but only on a local filesystem.
If you put a .sqlite (or DuckDB) file on a shared network drive (SMB or NFS) and multiple people try to connect to it, the database has to rely on the network protocol's file-locking mechanisms. Network file-locking is notoriously buggy. If your Python script tries to write metadata to the SQLite file while a colleague has a Tableau dashboard open reading that same file, you have a very high risk of permanently corrupting the database.
The official SQLite documentation literally states: "If you have many client programs accessing a common database over a network, you should consider using a client/server database engine instead of SQLite."
The "Serverless" Solution: Parquet Everything
Since you cannot run a PostgreSQL service on the server, you have to treat that shared drive exactly like a dumb cloud storage bucket (like AWS S3).
The trick is to stop trying to put a live database on the shared drive. Instead, you will build the database locally on your machine, and publish the results to the shared drive.
Here is the exact architecture to develop this locally while remaining 100% scalable and avoiding all file-locking corruption:
1. The Local Engine (DuckDB stays!)
Keep your build_warehouse.py exactly as it is! Run DuckDB locally on your own laptop.
When you run a model, your Python script ingests the UCI, melts it into the Long format, and stores it in your local DuckDB file.
You use DuckDB locally to create those "Wide Views" we talked about (e.g., view_perlnd_params).
2. The Publishing Step (The Game Changer)
Instead of putting the .db file on the shared network drive, you write a script that exports your DuckDB Wide Views and Model Catalog as small Parquet files.
model_catalog.parquet
perlnd_parameters.parquet
routing_edges.parquet
3. The Shared Drive (The Read-Only Lake)
You push these small metadata Parquet files to the network drive right alongside your massive model output Parquet files.
Your shared drive now contains absolutely zero databases. It is just a folder full of Parquet files.
Why this is brilliant: Parquet files do not suffer from network locking corruption because they are read-only for the BI tools. Fifty people can open Tableau dashboards pointing to model_catalog.parquet simultaneously, and the network drive won't break a sweat.
4. The Scale-Up Path (Future Proofing)
This architecture is actually more scalable than using SQLite. If you ever get funding to move to AWS or Azure, you literally just drag and drop this exact folder of Parquet files into an S3 bucket, point AWS Athena at it, and you have an enterprise cloud data warehouse with zero code changes.
By doing all the complex data wrangling in DuckDB on your local machine and only pushing static Parquet files to the agency server, you completely bypass IT's restrictions while giving your team blazing-fast dashboards.
Since this means Tableau will just be reading a folder of Parquet files for both the timeseries outputs and the metadata dimensions, how frequently are these models actually updated or run by your team (e.g., multiple times a day, weekly, or just a few major project milestones a year)?

